# CIGARTranslate

## Overview
`CIGARTranslate` is an R package I developed for the Scientific Programming course taught by prof. Rosario Piro at the Politecnico di Milano, as part of my MSc in Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics. The package contains functions that read the CIGAR string of a specified alignment in a BAM/SAM file and graphically represent the alignment, provided the ID of the alignment and the corresponding reference genome.

## Features

### Functions:

1. `read_bam` - uses Rsamtools::scanBam to read a user-specified BAM file and
converts it to a DataFrame object that is compatible with the next function. It takes the path to the BAM file as the only argument.

2. `alignment_from_cigar` - reads the CIGAR string and other information of a specified alignment from the loaded BAM file to visualize its alignment to the reference. It uses BSgenome.Hsapiens libraries to load reference sequences. It takes 3 arguments: the BAM DataFrame object generated by `read_bam`, the ID of the read of interest in that BAM DataFrame, and the genome assembly used in read mapping that generated the starting BAM.

### Data:

`loaded_Bam` - contains a portion of a BAM file (originally downloaded from ENCODE, shortened to 5000 alignments) to be used as an example for the functions.

## Documentation
Once the package is built, a vignette is also built and stored in the source directory, in the subdirectory `vignettes`. Documentation is also available for each function using
```r
?function_name
```

## License
This project is licensed under the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
